# MPoL GitHub Actions Workflows

We use GitHub actions to continuously integrate and deploy the MPoL codebase. This document summarizes the intended functionality of each of the workflows.

* `verify-tests-and-docs.yml` runs the unit tests and (if successful) builds (but does not deploy) the documentation to ascertain whether the codebase is in a working state (defined as passing tests on all non-experimental Python versions and a successful documentation build). This workflow is intended to run on every commit to the `main` branch as well as every commit to open pull requests.
* `docs-build-deploy.yml` builds and deploys the documentation to [GitHub Pages](https://mpol-dev.github.io/MPoL/). This workflow is intended to run on every commit to the `main` branch, to ensure that the currently deployed documentation matches the current state of the source code. Note that if you are merging a PR: you may find that the docs are built twice, once as part of the `verify-tests-and-docs.yml` and then again as part of `docs-build-deploy.yml`. This duplication is OK, since it is designed to support small changes implemented directly on `main` as well as changes introduced through branches and PRs.
* `pre-release.yml` tries to install the package into Linux, MacOS, and Windows using all supported Python versions. As the name suggests, this is designed to run in anticipation of a release and is triggered by a "draft" release on GitHub.
* `release.yml` is run when a release is submitted on GitHub. Note that there is no prerequisite for `pre-release.yml` to have run (or passed), but it is a good idea to go through this manually by drafting a release.